Common Instructions
III.1 General Rules
• Your project must be written in Python 3.10 or later.
• Your project must adhere to the flake8 coding standard.
• Your functions should handle exceptions gracefully to avoid crashes. Use try-except
blocks to manage potential errors. Prefer context managers for resources like files or
connections to ensure automatic cleanup. If your program crashes due to unhandled
exceptions during the review, it will be considered non-functional.
• All resources (e.g., file handles, network connections) must be properly managed to
prevent leaks. Use context managers where possible for automatic handling.
• Your code must include type hints for function parameters, return types, and variables where applicable (using the typing module). Use mypy for static type checking. All functions must pass mypy without errors.
• Include docstrings in functions and classes following PEP 257 (e.g., Google or
NumPy style) to document purpose, parameters, and returns.
III.2 Makefile
Include a Makefile in your project to automate common tasks. It must contain the
following rules (mandatory lint implies the specified flags; it is strongly recommended to
try –strict for enhanced checking):
• install: Install project dependencies using pip, uv, pipx, or any other package
manager of your choice.
• run: Execute the main script of your project (e.g., via Python interpreter).
• debug: Run the main script in debug mode using Python’s built-in debugger (e.g.,
pdb).
• clean: Remove temporary files or caches (e.g., __pycache__, .mypy_cache) to
keep the project environment clean.
5
A-Maze-ing This is the way
• lint: Execute the commands flake8 . and mypy . --warn-return-any
--warn-unused-ignores --ignore-missing-imports --disallow-untyped-defs
--check-untyped-defs
• lint-strict (optional): Execute the commands flake8 . and mypy . --strict
III.3 Additional Guidelines
• Create test programs to verify project functionality (not submitted or graded). Use
frameworks like pytest or unittest for unit tests, covering edge cases.
• Include a .gitignore file to exclude Python artifacts.
• It is recommended to use virtual environments (e.g., venv or conda) for dependency
isolation during development.
If any additional project-specific requirements apply, they will be stated immediately below
this section.
6
Chapter IV
Mandatory part
IV.1 Summary
You will implement a maze generator in Python that takes a configuration file, generates
a maze, possibly perfect (with a single path between entrance and exit), and writes it to a
file using a hexadecimal wall representation. You will also provide a visual representation
of the maze and organize your code so that the generation logic can be reused later.
IV.2 Usage
Your program must be run with the following command:
python3 a_maze_ing.py config.txt
• a_maze_ing.py is your main program file. You must use this name.
• config.txt is the only argument. It is a plain text file that defines the maze
generation options. You can use a different filename.
Your program must handle all errors gracefully: invalid configuration, file not found, bad
syntax, impossible maze parameters, etc. It must never crash unexpectedly, and must
always provide a clear error message to the user.
IV.3 Configuration file format
The configuration file must contain one ‘KEY=VALUE‘ pair per line.
Lines starting with # are comments and must be ignored.
The following keys are mandatory:
Key Description Example
WIDTH Maze width (number of cells) WIDTH=20
HEIGHT Maze height HEIGHT=15
ENTRY Entry coordinates (x,y) ENTRY=0,0
EXIT Exit coordinates (x,y) EXIT=19,14
OUTPUT_FILE Output filename OUTPUT_FILE=maze.txt
PERFECT Is the maze perfect? PERFECT=True
7
A-Maze-ing This is the way
You may add additional keys (e.g., seed, algorithm, display mode) if useful.
A default configuration file must be available in your Git repository.
IV.4 Maze Requirements
• The maze must be randomly generated, but reproducibility via a seed is required.
• Each cell of the maze has between 0 and 4 walls, at each cardinal point (North,
Est, South, West).
• The maze must be valid, meaning:
◦ Entry and exit exist and are different, inside the maze bounds.
◦ The structure ensures full connectivity and no isolated cells (except the ’42’
pattern, see below).
◦ As entry and exist are specific cells, there must be walls at the external borders.
◦ Your generated data must be coherent: each neighbouring cell must have the
same wall if any. E.g., it is forbidden to have a first cell with a wall on the
east side, and the second cell behind that wall without a wall on the west side.
• The maze can’t have large open areas. Corridors can’t be wider than 2 cells.
For example, you can have 2x3 or 3x2 open area, but never a 3x3 open area.
• When visually represented (see below), the maze must contain a visible “42” drawn
by several fully closed cells.
• If the PERFECT flag is activated, the maze must contain exactly one path between
the entry and the exit (i.e., it must be a perfect maze).
The “42” pattern may be omitted in case the maze size does not allow
it (i.e. too small). Print an error message on the console in that
case.
IV.5 Output File Format
The maze must be written in the output file using one hexadecimal digit per cell, where
each digit encodes which walls are closed:
Bit Direction
0 (LSB) North
1 East
2 South
3 West
8
A-Maze-ing This is the way
• A wall being closed sets the bit to 1, open means 0.
Example: 3 (binary 0011) means walls are open to the south and west. Or A
(binary 1010) means that east and west walls are closed.
• Cells are stored row by row, one row per line.
• After an empty line, the following 3 elements are inserted in the output file on 3
lines:
◦ the entry coordinates, the exit coordinates, and the shortest valid path from
entry to exit, using the four letters N , E , S , W .
• All lines end with a \n .
In conjunction with its specific configuration file, this output file could be tested automatically by a Moulinette. Also, a validation script is provided with this subject to control
that the output file contains coherent data.
Output file example
9
Chapter V
Visual representation
Your program must provide a way to display the maze visually, using either:
• Terminal ASCII rendering, or
• A graphical display using the MiniLibX (MLX) library.
The visual should clearly show walls, entry, exit, and the solution path.
User interactions must be available, at least for the following tasks:
• Re-generate a new maze and display it.
• Show/Hide a valid shortest path from the entrance to the exit.
• Change maze wall colours.
• Optional: set specific colours to display the “42” pattern.
You can add extra user interactions.
10
A-Maze-ing This is the way
Terminal default rendering of the maze
Different maze, shortest path and wall colours
11
A-Maze-ing This is the way
Maze rendering using Mlx
12
Chapter VI
Code reusability requirements
You must implement the maze generation as a unique class (e.g., ‘MazeGenerator‘) inside
a standalone module that can be imported in a future project.
You must provide a short documentation describing how to:
• Instantiate and use your generator, with at least a basic example.
• Pass custom parameters (e.g., size, seed).
• Access the generated structure, and access at least a solution.
The maze generator module grants access to the maze structure, but it
is not necessarily the same format as the output file.
This entire reusable module (code and documentation) must be available in a single file
suitable for a later installation by pip.
This package must be called mazegen-* and the file must be located at the root of your
git repository.
Both .tar.gz and .whl extensions are allowed, as generated by the standard build of a
Python package.
Example of a full filename: mazegen-1.0.0-py3-none-any.whl .
You must provide in you Git repository all needed elements to build the package. This
will be asked during the evaluation: in a virtualenv or equivalent, install the needed tools
and build your package again from your sources.
The main README.md file (not part of the reusable module) must also contain this short
documentation.
13
Chapter VII
Readme Requirements
A README.md file must be provided at the root of your Git repository. Its purpose is
to allow anyone unfamiliar with the project (peers, staff, recruiters, etc.) to quickly
understand what the project is about, how to run it, and where to find more information
on the topic.
The README.md must include at least:
• The very first line must be italicized and read: This project has been created as part
of the 42 curriculum by <login1>[, <login2>[, <login3>[...]]].
• A “Description” section that clearly presents the project, including its goal and a
brief overview.
• An “Instructions” section containing any relevant information about compilation,
installation, and/or execution.
• A “Resources” section listing classic references related to the topic (documentation, articles, tutorials, etc.), as well as a description of how AI was used —
specifying for which tasks and which parts of the project.
➠ Additional sections may be required depending on the project (e.g., usage
examples, feature list, technical choices, etc.).
Any required additions will be explicitly listed below.
• The complete structure and format of your config file.
• The maze generation algorithm you chose.
• Why you chose this algorithm.
• What part of your code is reusable, and how.
• Your team and project management with:
◦ The roles of each team member.
14
A-Maze-ing This is the way
◦ Your anticipated planning and how it evolved until the end
◦ What worked well and what could be improved
◦ Have you used any specific tools? Which ones?
If you implement advanced features (multiple algorithms, display options), describe them
in this README.md file.
English is recommended; alternatively, you may use the main language
of your campus.
15
Chapter VIII
Bonuses
You may add various bonuses to your project. Here are possible examples:
• Support multiple maze generation algorithms.
• Add animation during maze generation.